# WISELY JUDGING REVELATORY ENCOUNTERS 

What would you think if you had a spiritual experience that made your hair stand on end? Would you write it off as absolutely satanic or “off the wall” because it didn’t fit your theological code? Many people would and do. Supernatural encounters are real. The seer dimension into the spirit world is not something relegated to yesterday—it exists today and is on the rise! The question we must answer is: Do all such revelatory encounters come from the one true God, or can there be other sources? How can we tell the source or nature of the spirit beings we encounter? What are the marks of a truly God-initiated encounter or revelatory experience?

There is only one dependable, unshakable guide through the minefield of supernatural encounters. In a world filled with spiritual voices of the New Age and every other type and description, Christians need to know how to make their way through a spiritual field littered with hidden (and deadly) weapons of the enemy designed to wound or destroy the unwary and the undiscerning.

Entire segments of the Body of Christ have “written off” the supernatural aspects of God’s Kingdom and His workings in the Church today because of fears about being deceived and led astray. Others have written them off due to excess, abuse, and the bad testimony left behind by lone rangers who are not accountable to anyone in the Body of Christ. The prophetic has been given a bad rap at times, but some of the wounds have been self-inflicted. Nonetheless, God does speak to His people today and He is very capable of preserving us from harm and deception.

[Jesus said] “For everyone who asks, receives; and he who seeks, finds; and to him who knocks, it will be opened. Now suppose one of you fathers is asked by his son for a fish; he will not give him a snake instead of a fish, will he? Or if he is asked for an egg, he will not give him a scorpion, will he? If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask Him?” (Luke 11:10-13)

What about it—can we trust our Father? Believe it or not, God wants us to hear His voice even more than we want to hear it! He is a gracious Father who gives good gifts to His children. What is the foundation that we must lay? Stick close to Jesus, seek Him, and love Him! Give our all to Him. James 4:8a says it this way: “Draw near to God and He will draw near to you.” We could never overemphasize this point: Cultivate intimacy with God through a relationship with His only Son, Jesus Christ.

God is a Father, and He can be trusted. If we ask Him for the things of the Holy Spirit in the name of Christ, He will give us the real thing, not a counterfeit. Nonetheless, there are many issues that we must consider when approaching this valuable subject of wisely judging revelatory encounters.

Safety in the Family
Let’s backtrack for a moment and re-examine some basics. God still speaks today through many different avenues, including visions, dreams, and angelic visitations. Another one of these ways of the Holy Spirit is called “inner knowings.” We simply know that we know that we know! He also speaks to us through His inner voice, external audible voice, by journaling, through His Creation, and other awesome ways and means. Yet our most important source of revelation is the logos canon of Scripture. The only way we can accurately and safely interpret supernatural revelation of any kind is to ask God for the spirit of wisdom and understanding and to seek the counsel of the Lord.

Since the Bible is our absolute standard against which we must test all spiritual experiences, it should be obvious that we need to know and study God’s Word. It is our only absolute, infallible, unchanging standard of truth. Just as we must learn to crawl before we learn to walk in the natural, so we must learn the ways of the logos, the written Word of God, before we can learn to safely work with rhema, the revealed “now” word of God. A solid and balanced working knowledge of the New Testament is the very minimum requirement as we begin to investigate rhema revelation in depth. Otherwise, we have no plumb line of measurement.

God has also ordained that we find safety in our relationship to a Bible-believing fellowship. Paul wrote to the Ephesians to, “submit to one another,” and he described many of the areas of covering that God has placed in our lives. The Bible says, “In the multitude of counsellors there is safety” (Prov. 11:14b KJV). In an age of lawlessness, we find safety under the umbrella-like covering of the Lord, of His Word, and of the local church. We are not called to be proud religious rebels “doing our own thing.” God has called us to be humble servants committed to a local expression of Christ’s Body, diligently studying the Scriptures, praying daily, and being led by the Spirit of truth into His purposes and individual will for our lives.

Though I am involved in many councils at national and international levels and have a somewhat recognized prophetic and intercessory voice, my family and I are regular members of a local, Spirit-filled fellowship. So what I put before you is not theory to me. It is walking in a form of simplicity and purity unto Christ. We never outgrow the ABCs! With this in mind, we should all ask ourselves five basic questions in our quest to discern God’s voice in the spirit realm:

Am I regularly studying the Scriptures?
Am I maintaining a life of prayer?
Am I seeking purity, cleansing, and holiness in my life?
Am I a worshipful member of a local Christian congregation?
Am I committed to a few peer relationships that can speak into my life?
These building blocks must be firmly in place before we begin to investigate the principles of testing spiritual experiences. With these ABCs in place, our next step is to “examine everything carefully; hold fast to that which is good” (1 Thess. 5:21).

Sources of Revelation
The Scriptures indicate that spiritual revelation or communication comes from any one of three sources: the Holy Spirit, the human soul, and the realm of evil spirits. The need for discernment in this area is obvious.

The Holy Spirit is the only true source of revelation (see 2 Pet. 1:21). It was the Holy Spirit who “moved” the prophets of the Old Testament and the witnesses of the New Testament. The Greek word for “moved,” phero, means “to be borne along” or even “to be driven along as a wind.”1

The human soul is capable of voicing thoughts, ideas, and inspirations out of the unsanctified portion of our emotions (see Ezek. 13:1-6; Jer. 23:16). These human inspirations are not necessarily born of God. As Ezekiel the prophet said, they are prophecies “out of their own hearts…Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing” (Ezek. 13:2-3 KJV).

Evil spirits operate with two characteristics common to their master. They can appear as “angels of light” (or as “good voices”), and they always speak lies, because they serve the chief liar and the father of lies, satan. Messages delivered through evil spirits are often especially dangerous to people ignorant of God’s Word or inexperienced, in discernment because satan loves to mix just enough “truth” or factual statements in with his lies to trick gullible people. Just think of it as tasty bait carefully placed in the middle of a deadly trap. Acts 16:16-18 tells about a slave girl with a spirit of divination who spoke the truth about the disciples, but got it from a satanic source. When the apostle Paul eventually had heard enough and was irritated within, he commanded the spirit of divination to leave her.

In a world of imperfect people, God-given revelation can be mixed with competing information from sources that are not of God. People functioning as prophetic mouthpieces or visionaries are imperfect instruments, though vital to the Church today. None of us are immune to the effects of outward influences on our lives. Even though God’s Spirit is in union with our spirits, we can be strongly affected in our spirits and souls by such things as the circumstances of life, our physical or bodily circumstances, by satan or his agents, and very often by other people around us (see 1 Sam. 1:1-15; John 13:2; 1 Cor. 15:33). The solution is to “test” every source and aspect of the revelation—whether it is a dream, apparition, spoken word, or other type. First we should test ourselves with a series of self-diagnostic questions.

The Self Test
Is there any evidence of influences other than the Spirit of God in my life?
What is the essence of the “vision” or revelation? (How does it compare to God’s written Word?)
Was I under the control of the Holy Spirit when I received the vision?
Have I presented my life to Jesus Christ as a living sacrifice?
Have I been obedient to His Word?
Am I being enlightened with His inspiration?
Am I committed to doing His will, no matter what it is?
Am I yielding my life to the praises of God or to critical speech?
Am I waiting quietly and expectantly before Him?
The Source Test
The next step is to test whether the image, prophetic message, or vision received is from our own soulish arena, from satan’s realm, or from God. Dr. Mark and Patti Virkler, founders of the Christian Leadership University in Buffalo, New York, offer some excellent guidelines in this area in their landmark work, Communion With God. They teach that “the eyes of your heart can be filled by self or satan or God.”2 The following guidelines are adapted from a table in the Virklers’ study guide.3 First are three general instructions:

I am to cut off all pictures put before my mind’s eye by satan (see Matt. 5:28; 2 Cor. 10:5) using the blood of Jesus.
I am to present the eyes of my heart to the Lord for Him to fill. In this way, I prepare myself to receive (see Rev. 4:1).
The Holy Spirit will then project on the inner screen of my heart the flow of vision that He desires (see Rev. 4:2).
Testing Whether an Image Is From Self, Satan, or God
Find its origin (test the spirit; see 1 John 4:1).
SELF: Was it primarily born in the mind? Does it feed my ego or exalt Jesus? What does it resemble?
SATAN: Does the image seem destructive? Does it lure me away from the Lord?
GOD: Is it a “living flow of pictures” coming from my innermost being? Was my inner being quietly focused on Jesus?
Examine its content (test the ideas; see 1 John 4:5).
SELF: Does it have ego appeal? Is self the centerpiece, or is Jesus the one lifted up?
SATAN: Is it negative, destructive, pushy, fearful, and accusative? Is it a violation of the nature of God? Does it violate the Word of God? Is the image “afraid to be tested”?
GOD: Is it instructive, uplifting, and comforting? Does it accept testing? Does it encourage me to continue in my walk with God?
Check its fruit (test the fruit; see Matt. 7:16).
SELF: The fruits here are variable, but eventually they elevate the place of people in contrast to the centrality of Christ.
SATAN: Am I fearful, compulsive, in bondage, anxious, confused, or possessing an inflated ego as a result of the encounter?
GOD: Do I sense quickened faith, power, peace, good fruit, enlightenment, knowledge, or humility?
Nine Scriptural Tests
Here is a list of nine scriptural tests by which we can test every revelation that we receive for accuracy, authority, and validity. The following truths are for all of us—whether you are an acknowledged seer prophet or everyday believer in the Lord Jesus Christ. Let’s drop the plumb line of God’s Word in our lives!

Does the revelation edify, exhort, or console? “But one who prophesies speaks to men for edification and exhortation and consolation” (1 Cor. 14:3). The end purpose of all true prophetic revelation is to build up, to admonish, and to encourage the people of God. Anything that is not directed to this end is not true prophecy. Jeremiah the prophet had to fulfill a negative commission, but even his difficult message contained a powerful and positive promise of God for those who were obedient (see Jer. 1:5,10). First Corinthians 14:26c sums it up best: “Let all things be done for edification.”
Is it in agreement with God’s Word? “All scripture is given by inspiration of God” (2 Tim. 3:16a KJV). True revelation always agrees with the letter and the spirit of the Scriptures (see 2 Cor. 1:17-20). Where the Holy Spirit says “yea and amen” in Scripture, He also says yea and amen in revelation. He never, ever, contradicts Himself.
Does it exalt Jesus Christ? “He will glorify Me; for He will take of Mine, and will disclose it to you” (John 16:14). All true revelation ultimately centers on Jesus Christ and exalts and glorifies Him (see Rev. 19:10).
Does it have good fruit? “Beware of the false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravenous wolves. You will know them by their fruits…” (Matt. 7:15-16). True revelatory activity produces fruit in character and conduct that agrees with the fruit of the Holy Spirit (see Eph. 5:9; Gal. 5:22-23). Some of the aspects of character or conduct that clearly are not the fruit of the Holy Spirit include pride, arrogance, boastfulness, exaggeration, dishonesty, covetousness, financial irresponsibility, licentiousness, immorality, addictive appetites, broken marriage vows, and broken homes. Normally, any revelation that is responsible for these kinds of results is from a source other than the Holy Spirit.
If it predicts a future event, does it come to pass? (See Deuteronomy 18:20-22.) Any revelation that contains a prediction concerning the future should come to pass. If it does not, then, with a few exceptions, the revelation is not from God. Exceptions may include the following issues:
Will of the person involved.
National repentance—Nineveh repented, so Jonah’s word of judgment did not occur.
Messianic predictions (they took hundreds of years to be fulfilled).
There is a different standard for New Testament prophets than for Old Testament prophets, whose predictions played into God’s Messianic plan of deliverance.
Does the prophetic prediction turn people toward God or away from Him? (See Deuteronomy 13:1-5.) The fact that a person makes a prediction concerning the future that is fulfilled does not necessarily prove that that person is moving by Holy Spirit-inspired revelation. If such a person, by his own ministry, turns others away from obedience to the one true God, then that person’s ministry is false—even if he makes correct predictions concerning the future.
Does it produce liberty or bondage? “For you have not received a spirit of slavery leading to fear again, but you have received a spirit of adoption as sons by which we cry out, ‘Abba! Father’” (Rom. 8:15). True revelation given by the Holy Spirit produces liberty, not bondage (see 1 Cor. 14:33; 2 Tim. 1:7). The Holy Spirit never causes God’s children to act like slaves, nor does He ever motivate us by fear or legalistic compulsion.
Does it produce life or death? “Who also made us adequate as servants of a new covenant, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life” (2 Cor. 3:6). True revelation from the Holy Spirit always produces life, not death.
Does the Holy Spirit bear witness that it is true? “As for you, the anointing which you received from Him abides in you, and you have no need for anyone to teach you; but as His anointing teaches you about all things and is true and is not a lie, and just as it has taught you, you abide in Him” (1 John 2:27). The Holy Spirit within the believer always confirms true revelation from the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is “the Spirit of truth” (see John 16:13). He bears witness to that which is true, but He rejects that which is false. This ninth test is the most subjective test of all the tests we’ve presented here. For that reason, it must be used in conjunction with the previous eight objective standards.
Testing the Spirits
Discernment is desperately needed in the Body of Christ. We need a clear, clean stream of prophetic grace to flow in our day. The apostle John warns believers of every age:

Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world. By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God; and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God; this is the spirit of the antichrist, of which you have heard that it is coming, and now it is already in the world (1 John 4:1-3).

As we noted earlier, we have to test the spirits because prophecy, like the other gifts of the Spirit, is delivered through imperfect people. God has chosen to deliver the prophetic to the Church through the flawed and often immature vessels of humanity. Although “scriptural revelation” was perfect and inerrant, “prophetic revelation” in the Church of Jesus Christ does not function on this level of inspiration. This is because prophecy is not our only source or way to hear God’s voice. We have the living God dwelling in our hearts and the Holy Spirit leading and guiding each of us daily. Perhaps most importantly, since Calvary, the seer and the prophet serve in a supportive and secondary role to the Bible, which is God’s “more sure word of prophecy” (see 2 Pet. 1:19 KJV), and to the indwelling Spirit of Christ in the heart of each believer.

Another reason discernment is needed is because God has chosen to speak through many people prophetically instead of using just one or two “perfected” people in a generation. Thus there is always the possibility of mixture in the revelatory word, because He chooses to use wounded people with clay feet (see 1 Cor. 14:29). At the same time, all believers have the basic tools to discern truth from falsehood for themselves. The fact that revelation is open for judgment in this age proves its present, imperfect state. But remember, the imperfect state of prophecy is directly linked to the imperfect state of the people who deliver it—not to an imperfect God!

Evil and deceived false prophets are not the major source of erroneous revelation to God’s people today. Though this is on the rise, the vast majority of “diluted stuff” comes from sincere people who are simply adding their own insights to what started out as authentic, God-given revelation. They “add” to the nugget of God’s prophetic message by drawing from things in their own human psyche, heart, emotions, concern, or sympathy. We need to learn to discern when God has stopped talking and people have continued on. Some of us over the years have called this “hamburger helper”! Whenever we share a revelation or vision that God has given us for someone else, we must be very careful to give what God has given and then to clearly label or preface anything else we say as our own interpretations and views concerning that revelation or vision.

God’s Word tells us that we must prove all things and hold fast to that which is good (see 1 Thess. 5:21). At all times we must seek the Lord’s wisdom while refusing to use “wisdom” as an excuse for fear. We must be careful not to become offended at the genuine things that the Holy Spirit is doing, no matter how strange they may appear to us. Divine revelation and visionary experiences come in many different forms, and it is vital that we understand how to discern the true from the false.

With this in mind, let me share with you briefly five tests to apply to a prophetic message or ministry to help in discerning whether or not it is valid. These tests were suggested by Roger Olson of Bethel College, a scholar with strong ties to the Open Bible Standard Churches; they were included in an editorial by David Neff in Christianity Today:

The Christ Touchstone. If a prophecy promotes Christ and not the prophet, it may be valid.
The Apostolic Norm. If it is consistent with the message of the gospel as found in the didactic writings of the New Testament, it may be valid.
The Unity Criterion. If a prophecy does not promote spiritual elitism or schism, it may be valid.
The Sanity Check. If it does not require the sacrifice of intellect and the mindless acceptance of newly revealed teachings, it may be valid.
The Messiah Test. If it does not exalt some individual into an object of veneration, it may be valid.4
Now I know that some of you are waiting for me to dish out “some of the deeper things” to you by this point. But from my perspective, I would be remiss not to make sure these foundational truths are laid well before taking us further on our “mystical journey.” With this in mind, we would do well to study the 15 “wisdom issues” listed below. They will help us learn how to wisely judge the various forms of revelation we will encounter in our adventure with Christ.

Fifteen Wisdom Issues
Search for proper exegesis and scriptural context. One of the most important issues concerning wisdom is our interpretation of Scriptures—or proper exegesis. Many times, “prophetically gifted” people seem predominantly to take a type of loose symbolic interpretation of the Scriptures. Although there are different schools and methodologies of interpretation, we should look for the historical context from which the Scripture is speaking. Wisdom suggests that individuals with revelatory gifts should consult teachers, apostles, and pastors for additional clarity on scriptural interpretation. “Study to shew thyself approved unto God…” (2 Tim. 2:15 KJV). Walk with others!
Focus on Jesus. Manifestations of the Holy Spirit should not take center stage—Jesus is our central focus. While giving ourselves to the purposes of God, the movements of the Holy Spirit, and revelatory experiences from Heaven, let us not jump on just any bandwagon. Sometimes people will jump into anything that’s moving because they lack security and a proper biblical foundation. Remember the simple test: “Does this experience lead me closer to Jesus Christ?”
Major on the “main and plain” things. Manifestations are not our primary message. In the mainstream of evangelical orthodoxy, our emphasis is to be on the “main and plain” things of the Scriptures: salvation, justification by faith, sanctification, and so forth; these are followed by the consequential experiences revealed in people’s testimonies of how they are advancing in their relationship with God and the community of believers.
Follow biblical principles—not the rigid letter of the law. Some things fall into a “non biblical” category. This does not mean that they are wrong, “of the devil,” or contrary to the Scriptures. It just means that there is no sure “biblical proof text” to validate the phenomena. (There was no “proof text” to justify Jesus’ spitting in the dirt and anointing a man’s eyes with mud either—but it was obviously “right.”) Don’t stretch something to try to make it fit. Realize there will not be a Scripture for every activity. What is important is making sure that we follow the clear principles of the Word of God.
Build bridges. In “times of refreshing and supernatural experiences,” keep in focus the reality that there are other sincere believers who are not as excited about it as we are. This is normal and to be expected. Some of the disciples, such as Thomas, were less excited about the Resurrection than others, but they all stood for Christ in the end. We must be careful to keep ourselves clean from spiritual pride and arrogance and to devote ourselves to building bridges to our “more cautious” brethren through love, forgiveness, understanding, and kindness.
Honor and pray for leaders. Realize that every leadership team of a local congregation or ministry has the privilege and responsibility to set the tone or the expression of the release of the Spirit in their gatherings. God works through delegated authority! Pray for those in authority with a heart and attitude clean before God. Ask that they be given God’s timing, wisdom, and proper game plan. (Be careful and hesitant to apply the label of “controlling spirit” or similar titles to leaders! Most leaders are sincere believers who simply want to do what’s best for the overall good of their particular flock—and remember, they are God’s appointed and anointed.)
Be aware of times and seasons. Is anything and everything supposed to happen all the time? Apart from a sovereign move of God, I think not. Ecclesiastes 3:1 KJV tells us, “To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.” The Scriptures vividly depict “Pentecost meetings,” but also include clear admonitions from Paul on how to walk with those who are the “ungifted” or the unbeliever as well. We should never use our freedom to purposefully offend others. I personally believe that it is in line with God’s Word to have specific meetings for predetermined purposes. The leading of the Spirit works both ways. We can predetermine by His guidance that certain gatherings or sessions are oriented as “prophetic or life in the Spirit gatherings.” But also be hungry for and welcome those spontaneous occurrences when His manifest presence is ushered in even when we don’t expect or plan it.
Let love rule. The “unusual and rare” is not to be our consistent diet, nor will it ever replace the daily Christian spiritual disciplines. If all a person does is “bark like a dog” and quits reading the Scriptures and relating properly to other members of the local church, then most likely some other spirit is at work. Perhaps the individual has simply lost focus and needs a word spoken in love to help him or her maintain spiritual equilibrium in the midst of a mighty outpouring. Whatever the case, let love always be the rule.
Maintain balance. There is no exact science for figuring out all the manifestations of the Holy Spirit. When something is unclear, we should not over-define what we do not understand. There is a godly tightrope of dynamic tension between the reality of subjective experience and biblical doctrine. Let us strive to maintain our balance! There is a tension—it is supposed to be there!
Understand the relationship of divine initiation and human response. Is all this demonstrative activity (laughter, crying, shaking, falling, and so forth) necessarily from God? I specifically call these “manifestations of and to the Holy Spirit” for a very good reason. Although some of these external, visible, and audible signs are divinely initiated, we must admit that some of them are human responses and reactions to the Holy Spirit’s movement upon us or upon others close by. Divine initiative is followed by human response. This is normal. We must also make room for ethnic and different cultural displays of our affection to God. Every gift comes from God, but becomes expressed through a variety of clay pots!
Be known by your fruits. Although we want to bless what we see the Father doing, let us also direct this blessing into fruitful works. If we have been truly activated by the Holy Spirit, then we must channel it into practical works that express our faith. Let us channel this energy from a “bless me club” into a “bless others” focus that feeds the hungry and ministers to the poor, the widow, the orphan, and the single parent. Channel God’s river of revelatory blessing into a life of evangelism, intercession, worship, and other things that display the passion and compassion of Jesus for people.
Perceive the works of God and the motives of people. Although the phenomena of manifestations and prophetic encounters have occurred in revivals throughout Church history, I doubt that we can make a case for any of these individuals willing these things into being. These experiences were equated with receiving an anointing for power in ministry and as tools of radical means whereby God brought personal transformation.
Control your flesh and cooperate with God. Self-control is one of the fruits of the Spirit (see Gal. 5:22-23). Too many of us have forgotten it or thrown it out the window! Nowhere in the Scriptures are we told that we are to “control God”—we are told to control “self.” The fruit of self-control is to conquer the deeds of the flesh—lust, immorality, greed, and so forth. We are to cooperate with and yield to the presence of God and control the deeds of the flesh.
Be alert and aware. Let us search the Scriptures, review church history, seek the Lord, and receive input from those who are wiser and more experienced than us. Seasoned believers know that the enemy always tries to “club” Christians over the head after they have had an encounter or experience, in hopes that they will become confused, discouraged, and bewildered. We must continually arm ourselves for battle. This is a real war. These radical, revelatory visitations are not just “fun and games.” They come to lead us into greater effectiveness for our Master!
Avoid spiritual ditches. There are two deep ditches we should avoid. First, we should watch out for analytical skepticism, which will cause us to be offended by what we do not understand. The other deadly ditch is fear (of people, rejection, fanaticism, and so forth). Both of these “ditches” have a common fruit: criticism. Consider this nugget of wisdom spoken to me some years ago: “If you can’t jump in the middle of it, bless it. If you can’t bless it, then patiently observe it. If you can’t patiently observe it, then just don’t criticize it! Do not stretch out the rod of your tongue against those things you do not understand!”
Fear God, Not the Devil
Unfortunately, some churches have taught people to be afraid of the devil instead of emphasizing the completed work of the Cross and the authority of the believer. Although we need to have a healthy respect for the powers of darkness, we are never taught in the Scriptures to fear the devil. Let us turn on the light of truth and expose the deception of the evil one. The next chapter on “Discerning of Spirits” will help us learn more about this arena.

Let’s keep our focus clear—the Scriptures teaches us to “fear God and keep His commandments” (Eccles. 12:13). Let us trust our Father, ask for the gifts of the Holy Spirit in Jesus’ name, and expect authentic supernatural encounters of the heavenly kind to come down. Let us fear God, not the devil, and believe that our Father will give us good gifts.

 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    