# DREAM LANGUAGE 

As mentioned above, the Holy Spirit uses three different avenues of visionary revelation to speak into our lives: dreams, visions, and trances. In this chapter and the two that follow, we will look more closely at each of these in turn.

Dreams are closely associated with visions. The primary difference is that dreams occur during the hours of sleep, while visions usually take place while one is fully awake or conscious. Both means of visual revelation have solid biblical precedent: “If there is a prophet among you, I, the Lord, shall make Myself known to him in a vision. I shall speak with him in a dream” (Num. 12:6).

The Lord spoke these words to Miriam and Aaron when they challenged Moses’ position as God’s sole spokesman to the Israelites. He went on to say that His relationship with Moses was different, because He spoke to Moses face-to-face or, literally, “mouth-to-mouth” (see Num. 12:8). For our purpose, the pertinent point is that God clearly states here that dreams and visions are avenues He will use to speak to His prophets—in the past, the present, and the future.

While dreams are a specific portion of the prophetic ministry, they are not limited only to the prophetically gifted. Joel 2:28 says,

It will come about after this that I will pour out My Spirit on all mankind; and your sons and daughters will prophesy, your old men will dream dreams, your young men will see visions.

This Scripture was fulfilled on the Day of Pentecost and continues to be fulfilled in our own day. It is time for the Church to return to a biblical understanding of dreams as an avenue of discerning God’s voice.

Biblical Examples of Godly Dreams
As stated in Numbers 12:6, God sometimes speaks to His prophets through dreams. There are many occurrences of this in the Scriptures. For example, in Genesis 15:12-17, God speaks to Abraham in a dream regarding the centuries of slavery his descendants will endure in Egypt, as well as their eventual deliverance and settlement in the Promised Land. The occasion of this dream is the cutting of the covenant between Abraham and God. Although most people think of Abraham as a patriarch, Genesis 20:7 also refers to him as a prophet, the first person in the Bible so designated.

God also used dreams to speak to Jacob, Abraham’s grandson who was also a patriarch and, according to Psalm 105:15, a prophet as well. In the first of these dreams, Jacob saw a ladder extending into Heaven with angels ascending and descending it. At the top stood the Lord, who promised to be with Jacob, to prosper him, to make of his descendants a great nation, and to bring them into a land of their own (see Gen. 28:12-15). This was a reiteration of the promise God had made to Abraham. Interestingly enough, this passage in Genesis 28 also unfolds for us the understanding of “open heavens.” Is this not what we each want in our lives, congregations, and cities?

Daniel is another Old Testament prophet who received dreams from the Lord. The seventh chapter of the Book of Daniel relates his dream of four great and fearsome creatures, representing earthly kingdoms, and their eventual defeat by the Son of Man. With the possible exception of Ezekiel, no Old Testament prophet was more visionary than Daniel.

Prophets were not the only people in the Bible to receive dreams from God. The Scriptures record numerous instances when God used dreams to speak to heathens—people who did not know or fear Him. His purpose always was to protect His people and bring glory to His name. Here are a few examples:

Abimelech. This pagan king took Sarah, Abraham’s wife, into his own harem, believing her to be Abraham’s sister. God intervened: “But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said to him, ‘Behold, you are a dead man because of the woman whom you have taken, for she is married’” (Gen. 20:3). Abimelech rightly professed his innocent intent.
Then God said to him in the dream, “Yes, I know that in the integrity of your heart you have done this, and I also kept you from sinning against Me; therefore I did not let you touch her. Now therefore, restore the man’s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for you and you will live. But if you do not restore her, know that you shall surely die, you and all who are yours” (Genesis 20:6-7).
Abimelech did as he was told, and all was well.
Laban. Jacob’s father-in-law pursued Jacob after he fled with his wives, children, and flocks. Apparently, Laban intended to harm, even perhaps kill, his son-in-law. As with Abimelech, God intervened: “God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream of the night and said to him, ‘Be careful that you do not speak to Jacob either good or bad’” (Gen. 31:24). As a result, Jacob and Laban met in peace and departed on good terms.
A Midianite soldier. God had called Gideon to command a band of 300 men to deliver his land from the Midianite invaders. When Gideon needed encouragement, God sent him by night to eavesdrop at the Midianite camp:
When Gideon came, behold, a man was relating a dream to his friend. And he said, “Behold, I had a dream; a loaf of barley bread was tumbling into the camp of Midian, and it came to the tent and struck it so that it fell, and turned it upside down so that the tent lay flat.” His friend replied, “This is nothing less than the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel; God has given Midian and all the camp into his hand.” When Gideon heard the account of the dream and its interpretation, he bowed in worship. He returned to the camp of Israel and said, “Arise, for the Lord has given the camp of Midian into your hands” (Judges 7:13-15).
Not only did God give a dream to one pagan soldier, He gave its interpretation to another!
Pharaoh’s butler and baker. When Joseph was in prison in Egypt, he interpreted two dreams: one from Pharaoh’s butler and another from his baker. Both dreams had to do with the future. Just as Joseph interpreted, three days later the butler was released and restored to Pharaoh’s service, while the baker was hanged (see Gen. 40:1-23). God gave dreams to two non-believing Egyptians, and Joseph’s interpretations of them set the stage for his release, his interpretation of Pharaoh’s dream, and his rise to power as second-in-command in Egypt.
Pharaoh. Genesis chapter 41 tells of Pharaoh’s dream from God predicting seven years of plenty followed by seven years of famine. Joseph alone is able to interpret Pharaoh’s dream. In recognition of Joseph’s wisdom and insight, Pharaoh elevates him to prime minister and places him in charge of running the country and preparing for the years of famine. All of this served God’s greater purpose of bringing Joseph’s family to Egypt, where they would grow into a great nation, to be led out by Moses 400 years later.
Nebuchadnezzar. One of the most evil rulers of the ancient world, Nebuchadnezzar nevertheless received a dream from God, a dream so profound and powerful that he was obsessed with understanding its meaning. Of all his sages and officials, only Daniel was able to interpret the king’s dream (see Dan. 2:1-49). As a result, Nebuchadnezzar promoted Daniel to rule over the province of Babylon and all the other wise men in the kingdom. Furthermore, Nebuchadnezzar came to recognize the power and glory of the God of Israel, who had given the dream and its interpretation.
The wise men. These magi or astrologers from the east who came to worship the newborn Christ were warned by God in a dream not to return to Herod (see Matt. 2:12). This was part of God’s plan to protect His Son from Herod’s murderous jealousy.
Pilate’s wife. During Jesus’ trial before Pilate, the Roman governor received a warning from his wife: While he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent him a message, saying, “Have nothing to do with that righteous Man; for last night I suffered greatly in a dream because of Him” (Matt. 27:19). How did she know Jesus was a “righteous Man”? God revealed it to her in her dream.
The Bible also tells of godly people who, although not regarded as prophets, nevertheless received dreams from God. Joseph, son of Jacob, is one of these. In Genesis 37:5-11, Joseph relates to his parents and brothers a dream he had that symbolized his ruling over them and their bowing before him. This event leads directly to the incident where Joseph’s jealous brothers sell him into slavery in Egypt. Joseph’s dream comes true many years later, after he has risen to be prime minister of Egypt; and his brothers, not recognizing him, bow before him seeking food for their families because of the great famine. May the Lord raise up men and women of revelation and excellence once again to give the timely counsel of God to those in authority.

King Solomon, son of David, was another non-prophet who had a dream from God. “In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream at night; and God said, ‘Ask what you wish me to give you’” (1 Kings 3:5). What an open-ended offer! Solomon could have asked for anything! In the end, the king asked only for wisdom to rule his people well. Greatly pleased with the king’s request, God made Solomon the wisest man who ever lived—and gave him great riches and honor as well, which he hadn’t even asked for!

Joseph, the earthly father of Jesus, received three dreams related to Jesus’ birth and early life. The first dream revealed that he should not fear to take Mary as his wife because the child she carried was of the Holy Spirit (see Matt. 1:20). After Jesus was born, an angel warned Joseph in a dream to take Mary and Jesus and flee to Egypt to escape Herod’s clutches (see Matt. 2:13). Joseph’s third dream came after Herod died. An angel instructed Joseph to return to Israel with his family because conditions were now safe (see Matt. 2:19-20).

The Symbolic Language of Dreams1
Dreams are the language of emotions and often contain much symbolism. When dealing with the visionary prophetic realm, we must learn to take our interpretations first from the Scriptures and then from our own lives. Just a casual overview of the dreams in the Bible will make it clear that they are full of symbolic images and elements. One important point to remember in trying to understand dream language is that God is consistent with His symbolic language. How He speaks in Genesis is similar to how He speaks in Revelation. Throughout the Bible, the types and symbols remain very much the same. This same consistency of symbolism holds true in our own lives as well.

Generally speaking, biblical symbols can be classified into seven different categories:

Symbolic actions. In Ephesians 2:4-6, Paul says that “God…made us alive together with Christ…and raised us up with Him, and seated us with Him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” Two symbolic actions—raising and seating—describe what God has done for us spiritually through Christ. Raised refers to the Resurrection, and seated symbolizes a place of ruling. As Christians, we have been raised to new life in Christ and seated by His side to rule with Him.
Symbolic colors. In prophetic dreams, specific colors often symbolize specific things. This is particularly true for the seer. We will look more closely at the symbolism of colors a little later.
Symbolic creatures. Two quick examples should suffice here.
And the great dragon was thrown down, the serpent of old who is called the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world; he was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him (Revelation 12:9).
Two symbolic creatures—the dragon and the serpent—are used to represent satan.
And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits like frogs; for they are spirits of demons (Revelation 16:13-14a).
In this instance, John uses the frog as a symbolic creature for an unclean spirit.
Symbolic directions. For example, up often means toward God or toward righteousness, while down means the opposite. “And you, Capernaum, will not be exalted to heaven, will you? You will be brought down to Hades” (Luke 10:15). In Genesis 12:10, Abram went down to Egypt (away from the land where God had directed him) to escape a famine; in Genesis 13:1, he went up from Egypt, returning to his home.
Symbolic names. One common characteristic of names in the Bible is that they often reflect the character of the individual.
Please do not let my lord pay attention to this worthless man, Nabal, for as his name is, so is he. Nabal is his name and folly is with him; but I your maidservant did not see the young men of my lord whom you sent (1 Samuel 25:25).
This is Nabal’s wife, Abigail, speaking to David about her husband, and she should know! The name Nabal literally means “dolt.” By his foolish and inconsiderate actions toward David and his men, Nabal lived up to his name. My father’s middle name was Wayne. My middle name is Wayne. Wayne means wagon-builder or burden-bearer. My earthly father was a carpenter, ran a lumberyard, and worked with wagons. Though I am not a carpenter, I am a builder—but of a spiritual house. Indeed, one of the greatest passions in my life is being a burden-bearer in prophetic intercession. Names carry weight in the spirit. Often their meaning is more than just symbolic.
Symbolic numbers. Numbers have great symbolic meaning throughout the Bible. Humanity was created on the sixth day, and God finished His work and rested on the seventh. The introduction and the interpretation of these numbers are consistent throughout the Scriptures. We will examine symbolic numbers more closely later as well.
Symbolic objects. “I also say to you that you are Peter, and upon this rock I will build My church; and the gates of Hades will not overpower it” (Matt. 16:18). In this verse, Jesus uses two symbolic objects: a rock, symbolizing Peter (and perhaps Himself, in a play on words) and a gate, symbolizing the entrance to the realm of darkness. A rock as a symbol for the Lord is quite common in the Bible (see Ps. 18:2; 1 Cor. 10:4). Many other common objects are used in a similar way, such as shields, bowls, harps, candlesticks, and so forth.
The Meaning of Symbolic Colors
The use of symbolic colors in prophetic dreams calls for a little closer examination. Colors often are highly symbolic in the Scriptures with specific colors representing specific things, qualities, or characteristics. Here are several of the most common:

Amber—the glory or presence of God.
And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the color of amber, out of the midst of the fire (Ezekiel 1:4 KJV).
Amber is not gold, but more of a brilliant, shining, fire-like color—a very appropriate color to represent God’s glory. By the seer grace, one time I experienced the “beauty realm” of God where I saw an amber substance that appeared to be full of life. In this interactive vision, as I reached my hand into this glowing material, I was touched in a deep way by the Lord’s brilliant presence. I encountered the glory of God and was changed.
Black—sin, death, or famine.
When He broke the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, “Come.” I looked, and behold, a black horse; and he who sat on it had a pair of scales in his hand. And I heard something like a voice in the center of the four living creatures saying, “A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius; and do not damage the oil and the wine” (Revelation 6:5-6).
Blue—Heaven or the Holy Spirit.
Speak to the sons of Israel, and tell them that they shall make for themselves tassels on the corners of their garments throughout their generations, and that they shall put on the tassel of each corner a cord of blue (Numbers 15:38).
Blue is also often interpreted as the promises of God and/or the prophetic activity of the Holy Spirit.
Crimson/scarlet—blood atonement; sacrifice.
“Come now, and let us reason together,” says the Lord, “though your sins are as scarlet, they will be as white as snow; though they are red like crimson, they will be like wool” (Isaiah 1:18).
Purple—kingship; royalty. “And the soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on His head, and put a purple robe on Him” (John 19:2).
Red—bloodshed; war.
And another, a red horse, went out; and to him who sat on it, it was granted to take peace from the earth, and that men would slay one another; and a great sword was given to him (Revelation 6:4).
White—purity, light, righteousness. “I looked, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it had a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went out conquering and to conquer” (Rev. 6:2). The late Derek Prince interpreted the white horse as the horse of the Gospel of peace that Jesus rides, which goes forth to conquer the nations. Historically, times of war (the red horse) have been preceded by times of spiritual awakening and renewal (the white horse). God has a testimony of witness that goes forth into a land before a war breaks out. Historically, I have seen this occur time after time.
Green—life; the Levites; intercession.
Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord and whose trust is the Lord. For he will be like a tree planted by the water, that extends its roots by a stream and will not fear when the heat comes; but its leaves will be green, and it will not be anxious in a year of drought nor cease to yield fruit (Jeremiah 17:7-8).
The Interpretation and Meaning of Symbolic Numbers
Numbers are highly symbolic in the Bible, as well as in prophetic dreams, and great care must be exercised in properly interpreting their meaning. Here are six basic principles for interpreting symbolic numbers that will help prevent error or going to extremes.

The simple numbers 1-13 often have spiritual significance.
Multiples of these numbers, or doubling or tripling them carry basically the same meaning, only they intensify the truth. The number 100, for example, would have the same meaning as the number ten (law or government; see below), but to a greatly magnified degree.
The first use of a number in the Scriptures generally conveys its spiritual meaning.
Numbers should be interpreted consistently throughout the Scriptures. God is consistent, and what a number means in Genesis, it means through all Scriptures through Revelation.
The spiritual significance is not always stated, but may be veiled, hidden, or seen by comparison with other Scriptures.
Generally, there are good and evil, true and counterfeit, and godly and satanic aspects of numbers.
With these six principles in mind, let’s consider the symbolic meaning of individual numbers:

One—God, beginning, source. “In the beginning God [who is One] created the heavens and the earth” (Gen. 1:1). “But seek first [number one priority] His kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things will be added to you” (Matt. 6:33).
Two—witness, testimony. “On the evidence of two witnesses or three witnesses, he who is to die shall be put to death; he shall not be put to death on the evidence of one witness” (Deut. 17:6). “Even in your law it has been written that the testimony of two men is true” (John 8:17).
Three—godhead, divine completeness. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit [three-in-one], teaching them to observe all that I commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the age (Matthew 28:19-20).
Four—the earth, Creation, winds, seasons. “All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another flesh of birds, and another of fish” [four kinds of flesh in Creation] (1 Cor. 15:39). Then He said to me, “Prophesy to the breath, prophesy, son of man, and say to the breath, ‘Thus says the Lord God, “Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe on these slain, that they come to life” ’ ” (Ezekiel 37:9).
Five—cross, grace, atonement. This could include, for example, the fivefold ministry gifts: And He gave some as apostles, and some as prophets, and some as evangelists, and some as pastors and teachers, for the equipping of the saints for the work of service, to the building up of the body of Christ; until we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a mature man, to the measure of the stature which belongs to the fullness of Christ (Ephesians 4:11-13).
Six—humanity, beast, satan. The number of the beast in Revelation is 666 (see Rev. 13:18). As stated earlier, humanity was created on the sixth day of Creation (see Gen. 1:26-31).
Seven—perfection, completeness. God completed His creative work on the seventh day and rested (see Gen. 2:1-2). In the sixth chapter of Joshua, the Israelites march around Jericho once a day for six days and on the seventh day, seven times. When their march was completed, they blew trumpets and shouted, and the walls of Jericho fell.
Eight—new beginning. As a sign of God’s covenant with Israel, every male was to be circumcised when he was eight days old (see Gen. 17:10-12). When the Lord sent a great flood on the earth, He saved eight people (Noah and his family) in an ark to make a new beginning (see 1 Pet. 3:20). Many agree that the modern prophetic movement had its origins in 1988. This was a birthing time of a new beginning for the Body of Christ.
Nine—finality, fullness. Galatians 5:22-23 lists nine fruits of the Spirit: But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control; against such things there is no law. First Corinthians 12:8-10 lists nine gifts of the Spirit: word of wisdom, word of knowledge, faith, healing, miracles, prophecy, distinguishing of spirits, tongues, and interpretation of tongues.
Ten—law, government. The most obvious example of this is the Ten Commandments in the twentieth chapter of Exodus.
Eleven—disorganization, lawlessness, antichrist. As for the ten horns, out of this kingdom ten kings will arise; and another [the eleventh] will arise after them, and he will be different from the previous ones and will subdue three kings. He will speak out against the Most High and wear down the saints of the Highest One, and he will intend to make alterations in times and in law; and they will be given into his hand for a time, times, and half a time. But the court will sit for judgment, and his dominion will be taken away, annihilated and destroyed forever (Daniel 7:24-26).
Twelve—divine government, apostolic fullness. There were 12 tribes of Israel (see Exod. 28:21), and Jesus chose 12 disciples (see Matt. 10:2-4).
Thirteen—rebellion, backsliding, apostasy. “Twelve years they had served Chedorlaomer, but the thirteenth year they rebelled” (Gen. 14:4). This is the first appearance in Scripture of the number 13, which sets the standard for its interpretation.
Wisdom Points to Remember
Dreams and visions can be exciting and wonderful as a means of receiving insight and revelation, as long as they come from the right source. Remember that dreams and visions can arise from three places: the demonic realm, the soulish realm (our own human mind and spirit), and the Holy Spirit. In order to be effective in either giving or receiving visionary revelation, we must be able to distinguish the source. This is where the gift and discipline of discernment is so important.

Another important factor is giving careful attention to our environment. There may be occasions, for example, when we will have to remove from our homes some things that should not be there, such as certain cultic, occultic, or even soulish-tie objects, before our sleep will be sweet and clean, and our environment ready to receive pure revelation. We must be careful to identify and close off all potential demonic entrances to our home in Jesus’ name.

I travel out of the country quite frequently and like to collect flags and dolls in each nation that I visit. Over the years, I have built up quite a beautiful collection. At times I have to be very careful, however, especially when I travel to countries that have a lot of demonic activity. In those places, certain objects, particularly dolls, may be used for purposes other than providing souvenirs—witchcraft, for instance. These are the kinds of things we need to look closely at through our eyes of discernment and, through prayer, determine whether something is safe or needs to be disposed of.

Deuteronomy 13:1-5 contains a precautionary warning to all who would either receive or share visionary revelation:

If a prophet or a dreamer of dreams arises among you and gives you a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder comes true, concerning which he spoke to you, saying, “Let us go after other gods (whom you have not known) and let us serve them,” you shall not listen to the words of that prophet or that dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God is testing you to find out if you love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul. You shall follow the Lord your God and fear Him; and you shall keep His commandments, listen to His voice, serve Him, and cling to Him. But that prophet or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he has counseled rebellion against the Lord your God who brought you from the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery, to seduce you from the way in which the Lord your God commanded you to walk. So you shall purge the evil from among you (Deuteronomy 13:1-5).

Here is the main point: Dreams and visions are wonderful, but our lives are more than just dreams and visions. Our lives are in our Master, Jesus Christ. Someone may reveal true and accurate information and still be a deceptive tool of the enemy to seduce us and draw us in by fascination, and lead us away from Christ.

Don’t simply get caught up in the glitter and glamour of revelatory seers. Examine their message. Look at their lifestyle. What is their conduct? What actions are they calling for? If they call for something that is contrary to the principles found in the written Word of God, then they are deceived, immature at best, or even false prophets, no matter how genuine their visions seem to be or how powerful the messages.

We must always be on guard not to be deceived. After all, we are not following gifts alone; we are following Jesus. Dreams and visions are wonderful, but they must direct us to Jesus. It is Jesus we really want. Let Him be our goal. In all our getting, let’s be sure to get Jesus. In all our “seeing,” let’s see Jesus! If we get Jesus, we will get God, His Father, and if we get God, we get the Author of all authentic dreams and visions. Let us be like John the Beloved on the Isle of Patmos: in the Spirit on the Lord’s day and seeing Jesus!

 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    